In this lecture, you'll learn about the format of an IPv6 address.
So you already know that
it is 128 bits long compared to IPv4's 32-bit address.
The IPv6 address is written as
X:X:X:X:X:X:X:X.
So it's a great, big, long address.
But when you start working with IPv6 addresses, don't get freak out by the length of the address.
It's still just an IP address.
So whatever you're working with, IPv4 or IPv6, everything about that address works pretty much
exactly the same.
So the routing and the switching is going to work no matter whether you're using IPv4 or IPv6 in
the same way.
It's just a different and longer address that is used in IPv6.
But it's not like you have to learn a completely new technology or a completely new way of doing things.
It's just a longer address that is on your hosts. With the IPv6 address,
each X is a 16-bit hexadecimal field and hexadecimal means values are 0-9 and
A-F.
So an example of a valid IPv6 address would be
2001:0DB8:0000:0001:0000:0000:0000:0001.
You can see that it is a big long address compared to IPv4.
So our IPv4 addresses are 32 bits long and they're written as X.X.X.X. Each of those segments
in between the dots is 8 bits long.
We've got four of them.
So 4x8 gives us our 32-bit long address.
And each part of an IP address is known as an octet.
It's an octet because it's 8 bits long.
IPv6 addresses, on the other hand, are 128 bits long written as a string of X's with colons
in between. Each segment there between the colons is 16 bits, but there isn't an official name for
them
like we have the octets with IPv4. The equivalent of an octet for 16 bits would be hexadectet.
But that's just too hard to pronounce.
So nobody uses that when we're talking about IPv6 addresses. What the different pieces of the IPv6 address
are commonly known as is a hextet, or a piece, or a quartet.
But there's no official name. When you hear me talking about it during the section,
I'll either call it a hextet, or a segment, or a piece.
OK, so you've seen already the IPv6 addresses very long. It took me about a minute to read out that big,
long address before. There are,
however, thankfully, a couple of ways that we can shorten it to make things more convenient.
Address shortening is a standard convention and it's supported by all vendor's devices.
The first way that we can shorten the addresses is that leading zeros in each field can be removed.
So if we had that same example address that I was using before, that you can see on the screen now,
it can be as 2001,
and then the second hextet of 0DB8, we can write that as just DB8.
We can strip off the leading zero. And then colon 0,
the next hextet is 0000.
So we can strip off the three leading zeros and just write it as 0. The next hextet
0001,
we can write that as 1 and so on.
So whenever you look at IPv6 address and you see a hextet, if there's not four hexadecimal characters in
there, for example, if there is two, you know, the first two characters must have both been 00
because we can strip off the leading zeros.
The other thing that we can do is shorten the address is that successive all zero fields can be
shortened to colon colon.
So the middle bullet point you see here, that's the same as what we did just there in the last slide.
We're that big long address can be shortened by removing the leading zeros, but we can take it on a
step further as well.
So after removing the leading zeros, we had 2001:DB8:0:1:0:0:0:1. zero one one one
2001:DB8:0:1:0:0:0:1.
Well, we can change that to
2001:DB8:0:1::1.
So those three hextets near the end, which are always zero,
we can just write that as double colon.
So in the example that you see here, there's three different ways that we could write that same IPv6
address. The big, long, complete one up at the top,
that's valid.
We could take that in and that is acceptable.
The second one where we've removed the leading zeros, we could also type that in when we're configuring
an IPv6 address in the router and that would be accepted too. Or we can write it the third way where we've removed the leading
zeros and we've also removed successive all zero fields.
And again, that is a valid address. So the three IP addresses that you see there, they're all exactly the same.
There's just different ways of writing the same thing.
And they're all valid . We can use either of the three.
The standard way to do it is of course the shortest way, the last one you see, because that's the
most convenient way to do it.
Now, with removing successive all zero fields, that can only be done once in an address to avoid
confusion.
So, for example, if we had 2001:0:0:1:0:0:0:B,
that could be shortened to 2001::1:0:0:B or it could be shortened
to 2001:0:0:1::B. Because you see in the example, there's two different parts
of the address which have got successive all zero fields. But we can't shorten it to
2001::1::B. Because if we did that, you see it in the original address,
on the left hand side, we've got two zeros and then to the right of the 1, we've got three zeros.
Well, if we shortened it to 2001::1::B, we wouldn't know which side of
the 1 had two zeros and which side of the 1 had three zeros.
So we wouldn't know what the actual address was.
So stop that from happening.
You can only put in a double colon once during the entire address.
OK, so what was it for our IPv6 address format.
I'll see you back in the next lecture where we'll talk about the different address types in IPv6,
and we'll actually start configuring this on our router as well.
So you'll also see how we put this IPv6 address on your router. See you there.